docs: add initial docs for runtime tests (#24658)
nuxt/nuxt: docs/1.getting-started/11.testing.md

::code-group
```bash [yarn]
yarn add --dev @nuxt/test-utils vitest @vue/test-utils happy-dom playwright-core
```
```bash [npm]
npm i --save-dev @nuxt/test-utils vitest @vue/test-utils happy-dom playwright-core
```
```bash [pnpm]
pnpm add -D @nuxt/test-utils vitest @vue/test-utils happy-dom playwright-core
```
```bash [bun]
bun add --dev @nuxt/test-utils vitest @vue/test-utils happy-dom playwright-core
```
::

## Unit Testing

We currently ship an environment for unit testing code that needs a [Nuxt](https://nuxt.com) runtime environment. It currently _only has support for `vitest`_ (although contribution to add other runtimes would be welcome).

### Setup

1. Add `@nuxt/test-utils/module` to your `nuxt.config` file (optional). It adds a Vitest integration to your Nuxt DevTools which supports running your unit tests in development.

   ```js
   export default defineNuxtConfig({
     modules: [
       '@nuxt/test-utils/module'
     ]
   })
   ```

2. Create a `vitest.config.ts` with the following content:

   ```ts
   import { defineVitestConfig } from '@nuxt/test-utils/config'
   
   export default defineVitestConfig({
     // any custom Vitest config you require
   })

>    ```

Reviewer: Could you also add the script that can be used in `package.json`?
Would `"test:unit": "vitest"` be enough?

Author: Yes, it would be 👍

```bash [pnpm]
pnpm add -D @nuxt/test-utils vitest @vue/test-utils happy-dom playwright-core
```
```bash [bun]
bun add --dev @nuxt/test-utils vitest @vue/test-utils happy-dom playwright-core
```
::

## Unit Testing

We currently ship an environment for unit testing code that needs a [Nuxt](https://nuxt.com) runtime environment. It currently _only has support for `vitest`_ (although contribution to add other runtimes would be welcome).

### Setup

1. Add `@nuxt/test-utils/module` to your `nuxt.config` file. This is optional, and adds a vitest integration to your Nuxt DevTools which supports running your unit tests whilst in development.

   ```js
   export default defineNuxtConfig({
     modules: [
       '@nuxt/test-utils/module'
     ]
   })
   ```

2. Create a `vitest.config.ts` with the following content:

   ```js
   import { defineVitestConfig } from '@nuxt/test-utils/config'
   
   export default defineVitestConfig({
     // any custom vitest config you require
   })
   ```

### Using a Nuxt Runtime Environment

By default, `@nuxt/test-utils` will not change your default Vitest environment, so you can do fine-grained opt-in and run Nuxt tests together with other unit tests.

> We provided a filename convention that test files contains `.nuxt.`, like `*.nuxt.test.{js,ts}` and `*.nuxt.spec.{js,ts}`, will be run in Nuxt environment automatically.
> 
> Or you can add `@vitest-environment nuxt` in your test file as a comment to opt-in per test file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We provide a filename convention for test files containing `.nuxt.` (e.g. `*.nuxt.test.{js,ts}` or `*.nuxt.spec.{js,ts}`), which will be run in Nuxt environment automatically. You can also add `@vitest-environment nuxt` as a comment in your test file to opt-in per test file instead.
```

Author: I think these are separate ways of enabling the environment and should be kept separate.

Reviewer 2: Added _instead_ at the end of the last sentence, but yes, I agree! Numbered/bulleted list will better highlight the fact there are two options to achieve the same goal. I'd personally go for bullet points as these are equally viable options which don't need ordering.

Reviewer 2: Some ideas (single sentence actually sounds equally good):
```suggestion
You can automatically run given test file in a Nuxt environment by adding:
- `.nuxt.` to its filename (e.g. `*.nuxt.test.{js,ts}` or `*.nuxt.spec.{js,ts}`);
- `@vitest-environment nuxt` as a comment directly in the test file.
```

```suggestion
You can automatically run given test file in a Nuxt environment by either adding `.nuxt.` to its filename (e.g. `*.nuxt.test.{js,ts}` or `*.nuxt.spec.{js,ts}`) or `@vitest-environment nuxt` as a comment directly in the test file.
```

```js
// @vitest-environment nuxt
import { test } from 'vitest'

test('my test', () => {
  // ... test with Nuxt environment!
})
```

> Finally, you can set `environment: 'nuxt'`, to enable Nuxt environment for **all tests**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, you can set `environment: 'nuxt'` to enable Nuxt environment for **all tests**.
```

```js
// vitest.config.ts
import { fileURLToPath } from 'node:url'
import { defineVitestConfig } from '@nuxt/test-utils/config'

export default defineVitestConfig({
  test: {
    environment: 'nuxt',

>     // you can optionally set nuxt-specific environment options
>     // environmentOptions: {
>     //   nuxt: {
>     //     rootDir: fileURLToPath(new URL('./playground', import.meta.url)),
>     //     overrides: {
>     //       // other nuxt config you want to pass

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // you can optionally set Nuxt-specific environment options
    // environmentOptions: {
    //   nuxt: {
    //     rootDir: fileURLToPath(new URL('./playground', import.meta.url)),
    //     overrides: {
    //       // other Nuxt config you want to pass
```

    //     }
    //   }
    // }
  }
})
```

> If you have set `environment: 'nuxt'` by default, you can then opt-out [of the default environment](https://vitest.dev/guide/environment.html#test-environment) per test file as needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have set `environment: 'nuxt'` by default, you can then opt out of the [default environment](https://vitest.dev/guide/environment.html#test-environment) per test file as needed.
```

```js
// @vitest-environment node
import { test } from 'vitest'

test('my test', () => {
  // ... test without Nuxt environment!
})
```

::callout{icon="i-ph-warning-duotone" color="amber"}

> When you run your tests within the Nuxt environment, they will be running in a [`happy-dom`](https://github.com/capricorn86/happy-dom) or [`jsdom`](https://github.com/jsdom/jsdom) environment. Before your tests run, a global Nuxt app will be initialised (including, for example, running any plugins or code you've defined in your `app.vue`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you run your tests within the Nuxt environment, they will be running in a [`happy-dom`](https://github.com/capricorn86/happy-dom) or [`jsdom`](https://github.com/jsdom/jsdom) environment. Before your tests run, a global Nuxt app will be initialized (including, for example, running any plugins or code you've defined in your `app.vue`).
```

> This means you should take particular care not to mutate the global state in your tests (or, if you have, to reset it afterwards).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means you should take particular care not to mutate the global state in your tests (or, if you need to, to reset it afterwards).
```

::

### 🎭 Built-In Mocks

`@nuxt/test-utils` provides some built-in mocks for the DOM environment.

#### `intersectionObserver`

Default `true`, creates a dummy class without any functionality for the IntersectionObserver API

#### `indexedDB`

Default `false`, uses [`fake-indexeddb`](https://github.com/dumbmatter/fakeIndexedDB) to create a functional mock of the IndexedDB API

> These can be configured in the `environmentOptions` section of your `vitest.config.mjs` file:

Reviewer 2: `vitest.config.mjs` or `vitest.config.ts`?

Author: ```suggestion
These can be configured in the `environmentOptions` section of your `vitest.config.ts` file:
```

```js
export default defineVitestConfig({
  test: {
    environmentOptions: {
      nuxt: {
        mock: {
          intersectionObserver: true,
          indexedDb: true,
        }
      }
    }
  }
})
````

### 🛠️ Helpers

`@nuxt/test-utils` provides a number of helpers to make testing Nuxt apps easier.

#### `mountSuspended`

> `mountSuspended` allows you to mount any vue component within the Nuxt environment, allowing async setup and access to injections from your Nuxt plugins. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`mountSuspended` allows you to mount any Vue component within the Nuxt environment, allowing async setup and access to injections from your Nuxt plugins. For example:
```

```ts
// tests/components/SomeComponents.nuxt.spec.ts
it('can mount some component', async () => {
    const component = await mountSuspended(SomeComponent)
    expect(component.text()).toMatchInlineSnapshot(
        'This is an auto-imported component'
    )
})

// tests/App.nuxt.spec.ts
it('can also mount an app', async () => {
    const component = await mountSuspended(App, { route: '/test' })
    expect(component.html()).toMatchInlineSnapshot(`
      "<div>This is an auto-imported component</div>
      <div> I am a global component </div>
      <div>/</div>
      <a href=\\"/test\\"> Test link </a>"
    `)
})
```

#### `renderSuspended`

> `renderSuspended` allows you to render any vue component within the Nuxt environment using `@testing-library/vue`, allowing async setup and access to injections from your Nuxt plugins.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`renderSuspended` allows you to render any Vue component within the Nuxt environment using `@testing-library/vue`, allowing async setup and access to injections from your Nuxt plugins.
```

> This should be used together with utilities from testing-library, e.g. `screen` and `fireEvent`. Install [@testing-library/vue](https://testing-library.com/docs/vue-testing-library/intro) in your project to use these.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This should be used together with utilities from Testing Library, e.g. `screen` and `fireEvent`. Install [@testing-library/vue](https://testing-library.com/docs/vue-testing-library/intro) in your project to use these.
```

import { mockNuxtImport } from '@nuxt/test-utils/runtime'

const { useStorageMock } = vi.hoisted(() => {
  return {
    useStorageMock: vi.fn().mockImplementation(() => {
      return { value: 'mocked storage'}
    })
  }
})

mockNuxtImport('useStorage', () => {
  return useStorageMock
})

// Then, inside a test
useStorageMock.mockImplementation(() => {
  return { value: 'something else' }
}) 
```

#### `mockComponent`

`mockComponent` allows you to mock Nuxt's component.
The first argument can be the component name in PascalCase, or the relative path of the component.
The second argument is a factory function that returns the mocked component.

For example, to mock `MyComponent`, you can:

```ts
import { mockComponent } from '@nuxt/test-utils/runtime'

mockComponent('MyComponent', {
  props: {
    value: String
  },
  setup(props) {
    // ...
  }
})

// relative path or alias also works
mockComponent('~/components/my-component.vue', async () => {
  // or a factory function
  return {
    setup(props) {
      // ...
    }
  }
})

// or you can use SFC for redirecting to a mock component
mockComponent('MyComponent', () => import('./MockComponent.vue'))

// your tests here
```

> > **Note**: You can't reference to local variables in the factory function since they are hoisted. If you need to access Vue APIs or other variables, you need to import them in your factory function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note**: You can't reference local variables in the factory function since they are hoisted. If you need to access Vue APIs or other variables, you need to import them in your factory function.
```

  - Type: `'vitest' | 'jest'`
  - Default: `'vitest'`

### APIs

#### `$fetch(url)`

Get the HTML of a server-rendered page.

```ts
import { $fetch } from '@nuxt/test-utils/e2e'

const html = await $fetch('/')
```

#### `fetch(url)`

Get the response of a server-rendered page.

```ts
import { fetch } from '@nuxt/test-utils/e2e'

const res = await fetch('/')
const { body, headers } = res
```

#### `url(path)`

Get the full URL for a given page (including the port the test server is running on.)

```ts
import { url } from '@nuxt/test-utils/e2e'

const pageUrl = url('/page')
// 'http://localhost:6840/page'
```

### Testing in a Browser

We provide built-in support using Playwright within `@nuxt/test-utils`, but you can also use other test runners for end-to-end browser testing.

#### `createPage(url)`

> You can create a configured Playwright browser instance, and (optionally) point it at a path from the running Get the full URL for a given page (including the port the test server is running on.)

Reviewer 2: This sentence might need a revision.

Author: ```suggestion
You can create a configured Playwright browser instance, and (optionally) point it at a path from the running server. You can find out more about the API methods available from [in the Playwright documentation](https://playwright.dev/docs/api/class-page).
```
